# eBay auction competitiveness prediction
### eBay auction competitiveness prediction model
### Executive Summary
The study investigated an auction dataset that included 1,972 transaction records on eBay from May to June 2004. The data comprises 8 variables: product Category, Currency in given prices, SellerRating on eBay, auction Duration, EndDay which indicated the day of the week the auction ended, ClosedPrice which implied the item sold price, OpenPrice which is the original price set by the seller, and an indicator variable “Competitive?” which illustrated whether the transaction had more than one bid. The goal was to find an effective decision tree that could forecast whether a transaction would be competitive or not based on the information available at the start of an auction.
Prior to data modelling, the predictors underwent data preparation in which categorical variables were converted to dummy variables. An exploratory data analysis (EDA) was further conducted to examine the distribution and trend of provided variables. To the dataset, total three decision tree models with varying combination of predictors would be fitted. The first decision tree was built using all available predictors and has an accuracy score of 0.8276. Because the close price was unknown when an auction is posted, a more practical full class decision tree was performed on all variables except the target variable and ClosePrice. However, the prediction accuracy for this functional model fell to 71.10%. After evaluating feature importance, the third decision tree was only dependent on Category, Currency, SellerRating and OpenPrice. This is the optimal decision tree in the report, with relatively clear decision rules and a 72.24% forecasting precision. Furthermore, the report includes a section that discussed the possibility of a duplication problem in the eBay auction dataset in order to clarify the assumptions.
Based on the findings of the models and data, we recommend that eBay sellers set a relatively low opening price, improve their seller rating, offer to sell in GBP, choose a 5-day auction period, and set the close date to Monday to enhance competitiveness of their auctions. Considering the model performance in identifying the competitiveness of auctions, the model could significantly assist the decision making of the eBay sellers.
### Introduction
eBay is an e-commerce company that enables consumer-to-consumer and business-to-consumer sales through auctions via their internet platform. Anyone can register to sell a product on eBay, if their address is amongst the authorized countries or regions. The product is sold to the highest bidder once the auction time period has ended. Data from 1,972 auctions that were transacted on eBay.com between May and June 2004 was collected. The data contains information on the auction category, the seller’s eBay rating, the auction duration, opening price, currency, day of week the auction will close on and the closing price of the auction. Auction categories identify the selling products category such as Automotive or Sporting Goods. 
The purpose of this report is to discuss the results of a model that classifies whether an auction is competitive or not on the eBay platform. A competitive auction is defined as an auction that receives at least two bids and this information is available for all 1,972 auctions collected. The goal is to identify recommendations to improve the likelihood of a seller’s auction of being competitive. This will be beneficial for sellers as competitive auctions result in a product being sold at a higher price as it has multiple bidders who are willing to pay for the product. Python’s machine learning library, scikit-learn, will be used to develop a Decision Tree classification model. 
This report will first discuss any data preparation and exploratory data analysis (EDA) steps. Followed by the results of developing multiple decision tree models with different predictor variables and concluding with a formal recommendation to eBay sellers.
### Data Preparation and Exploratory Data Analysis
Decision trees do not require much data preparation as normalization of predictor variables is not required. The data is complete, meaning that there are no missing values in any of the predictors for all 1,972 auctions. As scikit-learn does not currently support categorical variables [1], the categorical variables in the data set were converted to dummy variables so that they are integers of 0 or 1. The categorical variables in the data set include the sale product’s category, the currency, the duration of the auction and the day of the week the auction closed on. The data set was also inspected for duplicate rows, i.e., rows that contain all the same values for each column in the data table. There were 346 duplicate rows detected, example rows are shown below. These auctions have products from the same category, are priced in the same currency, from a seller with the same rating score and the same auction duration, auction end day of the week and opening/closing prices. As the seller rating is the same for these auctions it is likely the same seller, however, the data does not contain the seller’s account information, therefore, it is not possible to confirm. It is possible that the seller is selling multiple of the same item in different auctions. Since it is possible for two sellers to have the same rating and for a seller to list the same item (i.e., the seller could be selling two identical video games) in two auctions it was decided to keep these duplicate rows in the dataset. However, an analysis without duplicates will be discussed later in this report.
